feat: experimental fonts (#11302)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/experimental-flags/fonts.mdx

---

> title: Experimental fonts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Experimental fonts API
```

Based on Talking and Doc'ing, something like this sounds a bit clearer, and uses similar wording as the link in the guide.

Reviewer 2: I like this!

---
title: Experimental fonts API
sidebar:
  label: Fonts
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 6
---

import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

<p>

**Type:** `FontFamily[]`<br />
<Since v="5.7.0" />
</p>

> This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various providers through a unified API. It automatically creates optimized fallbacks and preload links.

Author: ```suggestion
This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various providers through a unified API.

Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. We're doing automatic [optimization](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) by creating preload links and optimized fallbacks.
```

To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
        }]
    }
})
```

Then, add a `<Font />` component and site-wide styling in your `<head>`:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font family='--font-roboto' preload />

<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

{/* ## Usage guide

To use the experimental fonts API you need to configure your desired font families, add the `<Font />` component to your page `<head>`, and use your defined CSS variable in your site styling. */}

> ## Configuration

Author: Try match https://starlight.astro.build/guides/customization/#social-links

            fonts: [{
                provider: fontProviders.google(),
                name: "Roboto",
                cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
            }]
        }
    })
    ```

</Steps>

More configuration options, such as defining fallback font families, are available and some will depend on your provider. See the full [configuration reference](#font-configuration-reference) to learn more.

## Applying fonts

The `<Font />` component outputs style tags and (optionally) preload links for a given font family. 

It must be imported and added to your page `<head>` and `family` is required. Pass the `cssVariable` value from your configuration.

This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" ins={2, 5}
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font family="--font-roboto" preload />
```

<ReadMore>See the full [`<Font>` component reference](#font--component-reference) for more information.</ReadMore>

Since the `<Font />` component generates CSS with font declarations, you can reference the font family using the `cssVariable` defined in your Astro configuration:

> ```css

Author: Make this the 1st item of the tabs below

<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

If you use Tailwind CSS, you can use the following configuration:

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 4.0">

```css title="src/styles/global.css" ins={4}
@import 'tailwindcss';

@theme {
    --font-sans: var(--font-roboto);
}
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 3.0">

```js title="tailwind.config.mjs" ins={6-8}
/** @type {import("tailwindcss").Config} */
export default {
  content: ["./src/**/*.{astro,html,js,jsx,md,mdx,svelte,ts,tsx,vue}"],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
    fontFamily: {
        sans: ["var(--font-roboto)"]
    }
  },
  plugins: [],
};
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## `<Font />` component reference

This component outputs style tags and preload links for a given font family.

```astro
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---
```

### family

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

The [`cssVariable`](#cssvariable) registered in your Astro configuration:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" "family"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

> <Font family="--font-roboto" />

Author: Rename prop to `cssVariable`:
- update all occurrences
- update rfc
- code pr

weight: "100 900"
```

##### style

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

A [font style](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-style):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
style: "normal"
```

##### src

<p>

**Type:** `string | URL | { url: string | URL; tech?: string }`
</p>

Font [sources](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/src). It can be a path relative to the root, a package import or a URL:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
src: [
    "./src/assets/fonts/MyFont.woff2",
    new URL("./custom.ttf", import.meta.url),
    "my-package/SomeFont.ttf"
]
```

URLs are particularly useful if you inject local fonts through an integration.

You can also specify a [tech](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/src#tech) by providing objects:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
src: [{ url:"./src/assets/fonts/MyFont.woff2", tech: "color-COLRv1" }]
```

##### Other shared properties

The following options from remote font families are also available for local font families:

- [display](#display)
- [unicodeRange](#unicoderange)
- [stretch](#stretch)
- [featureSettings](#featuresettings)
- [variationSettings](#variationsettings)

> ## Available remote font providers

Author: Move this above reference

Astro re-exports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers:

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"
```

The following are providers are built in and available to use. However, any unifont provider can be used to make a [custom Astro font provider](#custom-font-providers).

> 

Author: - 1 big code block instead of sub sections
- list providers with links

---
title: Experimental fonts API
sidebar:
  label: Fonts
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 6
---

import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

<p>

**Type:** `FontFamily[]`<br />
<Since v="5.7.0" />
</p>

This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various providers through a unified API. It automatically creates optimized fallbacks and preload links.

> 

Author: opiniated

import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
        }]
    }
})
```

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font family='--font-roboto' preload />

<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

## Usage guide

> To use the experimental fonts API you need to update your Astro configuration, call the `<Font />` component and use the CSS variable:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the experimental fonts API you need to update your Astro configuration, call the `<Font />` component, and use the CSS variable:
```

### Astro configuration

`experimental.fonts` accepts an array of `FontFamily`. To get started, let's setup one family:

<Steps>

1. Register an empty family to start with:

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-8}
    import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

    export default defineConfig({
        experimental: {
            fonts: [{
                // We are going to add things here
            }]
        }
    })
    ```

> 2. Pick a provider from the [built-in remote provider](#available-remote-font-providers) or the [local provider](#local-font-families). In this example, we'll use the Google font provider:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Pick a provider from the [built-in remote providers](#available-remote-font-providers) or the [local provider](#local-font-families). In this example, we'll use the Google font provider:
```

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" del={1} ins={2,7}
    import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"
    import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

    export default defineConfig({
        experimental: {
            fonts: [{
                provider: fontProviders.google(),
            }]
        }
    })
    ```

> 3. Pick a font family supported by your provider (documented for each provider in the [reference](#available-remote-font-providers)). For our example, choose one on the [Google Fonts website](https://fonts.google.com/):

Reviewer 3: Since our example shows Roboto this should say "For our example we've chosen Roboto" with a link to the font

I'm on my phone or I would go grab the link and do a suggestion

Author: ```suggestion
3. Pick a font family supported by your provider (documented for each provider in the [reference](#available-remote-font-providers)). For our example, we've choosen [Roboto from Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Roboto):
```
Something like that?

Reviewer 3: Looks great :)

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={7}
    import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

    export default defineConfig({
        experimental: {
            fonts: [{
                provider: fontProviders.google(),
                name: "Roboto",
            }]
        }
    })
    ```

> 3. Choose a CSS variable. This will allow you to reference the font family you just registered in CSS:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Define a CSS variable for referencing the font family registered in your CSS:
```

>     This name can be anything you want, as long as it is a valid [CSS identifier](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident). You may wish to choose an identifier that resembles a CSS variable, but this is not required. 

Reviewer 2: Thanks! I figured we would get through things like this eventually on Talking and Doc'ing if not before. There are some "assumptions" I made while writing.

Note: the link to `ident` shows a much wider range of what's acceptable, and a CSS variable is only one possibility. So maybe that link wants to be [to custom properties directly](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/--*) instead?

This is what's shown at `ident`:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/26764de7-a08c-40c2-a61e-e115805a4029)

This is what's shown at custom properties link:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/650b3569-87f9-4a36-adbb-5e393e390ad0)

>     This name can be anything you want, as long as it is a valid [CSS identifier](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident). You may wish to choose an identifier that resembles a CSS variable, but this is not required. 

Reviewer 2: Would "must be a valid ident in the form of a CSS variable (starting with `--`)" be a correct statement? (not necessarily final wording, just checking that that is correct.

>     This name can be anything you want, as long as it is a valid [CSS identifier](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident). You may wish to choose an identifier that resembles a CSS variable, but this is not required. 

Reviewer 3: Side note, 100% using `🔥variable` for my CSS in the future :P

>     This name can be anything you want, as long as it is a valid [CSS identifier](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident). You may wish to choose an identifier that resembles a CSS variable, but this is not required. 

Author: > Would "must be a valid ident in the form of a CSS variable (starting with `--`)" be a correct statement? (not necessarily final wording, just checking that that is correct.

Yep would be perfect!

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={8}
    import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

    export default defineConfig({
        experimental: {
            fonts: [{
                provider: fontProviders.google(),
                name: "Roboto",
                cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
            }]
        }
    })
    ```

</Steps>

More options are available and depend on your provider, refer to the [reference](#reference) to learn more.

### `<Font />` component

This component outputs style tags and preload links for a given font family:

<Steps>

1. Import the component to be used in your page `<head>`:

    ```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" ins={2}
    ---
    import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
    ---
    ```

> 2. Call the component and specify a `family`. It takes the value of the `cssVariable` in your Astro configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Call the component and specify a `family`. It takes the value for `cssVariable` defined in your Astro configuration:
```

> The `<Font />` component outputs style tags and (optionally) preload for a given font family. 

Author: ```suggestion
The `<Font />` component outputs style tags and (optionally) preload links for a given font family. 
```

    ```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" ins={5}
    ---
    import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
    ---

    <Font family="--font-roboto" preload />
    ```

>     `family` is strongly typed using the values from your Astro configuration to help you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For ease of use, `family` is strongly typed using the values from your Astro configuration.
```

</Steps>

### Use the CSS variable

> Now that the `<Font />` component generates CSS with font declarations, you can reference the font family using the `cssVariable` you used in your Astro configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the `<Font />` component generates CSS with font declarations, you can reference the font family using the `cssVariable` defined in your Astro configuration:
```

Since it's a new feature it felt weird saying it as if this is a change from a previous version

}
</style>
```

If you use Tailwind CSS, you can use the following configuration:

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 4.0">

```css title="src/styles/global.css" ins={4}
@import 'tailwindcss';

@theme {
    --font-sans: var(--font-roboto);
}
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 3.0">

```js title="tailwind.config.mjs" ins={6-8}
/** @type {import("tailwindcss").Config} */
export default {
  content: ["./src/**/*.{astro,html,js,jsx,md,mdx,svelte,ts,tsx,vue}"],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
    fontFamily: {
        sans: ["var(--font-roboto)"]
    }
  },
  plugins: [],
};
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Reference

### Astro configuration

#### Shared properties

##### name

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

The font family name:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
name: "Roboto"
```

##### cssVariable

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

The CSS variable name. It must be a [valid ident](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
```

##### fallbacks

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["sans-serif"]`
</p>

An array of font fallbacks:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
fallbacks: ["CustomFont", "serif"]
```

> If the last fallback if a [generic family name](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#generic-name), Astro will try to generate an [optimized fallback](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/font-fallbacks) using font metrics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the last fallback is a [generic family name](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#generic-name), Astro will try to generate an [optimized fallback](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/font-fallbacks) using font metrics.
```

##### automaticFallback

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `true`
</p>

A flag to toggle the automatic fallback generation described above:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
automaticFallback: false
```

#### Remote font families

> This kind of family accepts an [Astro font provider](#font-provider). Unde the hood, options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This kind of family accepts an [Astro font provider](#font-provider). Under the hood, options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/).
```

>             fallbacks: ["sans-serif"], // optional

Author: ```suggestion
            fallbacks: ["sans-serif"], // default
```

##### provider

<p>

**Type:** `AstroFontProvider`
</p>

Accepts an Astro font provider. You can use a [built-in one](#available-remote-font-providers) or [write your own](#custom-providers):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
        }]
    }
})
```

##### weights

<p>

**Type:** `(number | string)[]`<br />
**Default:** `[400]`
</p>

An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
weights: [200, "300", "bold"]
```

> If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify the weights range:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify a range of weights:
```

Clarity

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
weights: ["100 900"]
```

##### styles

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["normal", "italic"]`
</p>

An array of [font styles](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-style):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
styles: ["normal", "oblique"]
```

##### subsets

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["cyrillic-ext", "cyrillic", "greek-ext", "greek", "vietnamese", "latin-ext", "latin"]`
</p>

An array of [font subsets](https://fonts.google.com/knowledge/glossary/subsetting):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
subsets: ["latin"]
```

##### display

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `"swap"`
</p>

> An [font display](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-display):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A [font display](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-display):
```

> An identifier of your choice for your font, conventionally in the form of a CSS variable. It must be a [valid `<ident>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident):

Author: This is not accurate. Being a CSS variable ident is a requirement

> 

Author: More info about the flow

> 

Author: Want no fallbacks? provide an empty array?

> Whether or not to enable automatic fallback font generation:

Author: More details: why would you enable this?

> 

Author: Details about the generation process and what happens

> Further configuration options are available for remote fonts. Set these to customize the data loaded from your font provider, for example to only download certain font weights or styles.

Author: Link to available remote providers

> Further configuration options are available for remote fonts. Set these to customize the data loaded from your font provider, for example to only download certain font weights or styles.

Author: Note that properties may not be supported by providers

> Under the hood, thse options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/).

Author: ```suggestion
Under the hood, these options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/).
```

#### weights

<p>

**Type:** `(number | string)[]`<br />

> **Default:** `[400]`

Author: Gonna be prone to error!

Reviewer 2: I believe I addressed this!

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

A [unicode range](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
unicodeRange: ["U+26"]
```

##### stretch

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

A [font stretch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-stretch):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
stretch: "condensed"
```

##### featureSettings

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

Font [feature settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-feature-settings):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
featureSettings: "'smcp' 2"
```

##### variationSettings

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

Font [variation settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-variation-settings):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
variationSettings: "'xhgt' 0.7"
```

#### Available remote font providers

> Astro reexports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astro re-exports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers:
```

> An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight):

Author: By default only weight 400 for perf reasons. Be selective so you don't include too much fonts

> ```js title="astro.config.mjs"

Author: titles can be removes for those small codeblocks

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"
```

##### adobe

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.adobe({
    id: process.env.ADOBE_ID
})
```

##### bunny

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.bunny()
```

##### fontshare

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.fontshare()
```

##### fontsource

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.fontsource()
```

##### google

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.google()
```

##### Custom providers

> Any unifont provider can be used but it cannot be as is. [Learn how to make a custom Astro font provider](#font-provider).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Any unifont provider can be used but may require additional setup. [Learn how to make a custom Astro font provider](#font-provider).
```

Not sure if this is the correct fix here but I think it's a bit clearer

Author: No what I mean is literally you can't do `provider: someUnifontProvider()`. You have to use our API, which works with unifont under the hood

Reviewer 3: Ah okay, now I understand

I do think it needs to be clarified a bit still but might require one of our docs experts haha

Maybe just a simple `The Astro Fonts API supports any unifont provider`

I think this followed by the link text we already have makes it a bit more clear, however like I said could maybe still be improved

> An array of [font subsets](https://fonts.google.com/knowledge/glossary/subsetting):

Author: Gotta find a better link

Reviewer 2: Ooh, this link even allows you to enter a Google font, and it will return all possible subsets with their size!

https://knaap.dev/posts/font-subsetting/ How about this one?

#### Local font families

This kind of family uses font files from the filesystem.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: "local",
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
            variants: [
                {
                    weight: 300,
                    style: "normal",
                    src: ["./src/assets/fonts/roboto-300.woff2"]
                },
                {
                    weight: 500,
                    style: "normal",
                    src: ["./src/assets/fonts/roboto-500.woff2"]
                },
            ]
        }]
    }
})
```

##### provider

<p>

**Type:** `"local"`
</p>

Marks the font family as local

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: "local"
```

##### Variants

> Each variant represent a [`@font-face` declaration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each variant represents a [`@font-face` declaration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/).
```

> The following options are in common with remote font families:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following options from remote font families are also available for local font families:
```
Clarity

- [display](#display)
- [unicodeRange](#unicodeRange)
- [stretch](#stretch)
- [featureSettings](#featureSettings)
- [variationSettings](#variationSettings)

It also accepts the following properties:

###### weight

<p>

**Type:** `number | string`
</p>

A [font weight](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
weight: 200
```

> If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify the weights range:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify a range of weights:
```

> Further configuration options are available for when using font files from the filesystem. Set these to describe the data to be loaded from your local files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Further configuration options are available when using font files from the filesystem. Set these to describe the data to be loaded from your local files.
```

>             name: "Roboto",

Author: Use "Custom"

>             variants: [

Author: Use 400 and 700

>             ]

Author: Add `// ...`

##### style

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

A [font style](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-style):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
style: "normal"
```

##### src

<p>

> **Type:** `string | URL | { url: string | URL; tech?: string }`

Author: ```suggestion
**Type:** `(string | URL | { url: string | URL; tech?: string })[]`
```

</p>

Font [sources](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/src). It can be a path relative to the root, a package import or a URL:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
src: [
    "./src/assets/fonts/MyFont.woff2",
    new URL("./custom.ttf", import.meta.url),
    "my-package/SomeFont.ttf"
]

> ```

Author: Update to tabs + relative path with woff2 AND woff

URLs are particularly useful if you inject local fonts through an integration.

You can also specify a [tech](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/src#tech) by providing objects:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
src: [{ url:"./src/assets/fonts/MyFont.woff2", tech: "color-COLRv1" }]
```

##### Other shared properties

> The following options from remote font families are also available for local font families:

Author: ```suggestion
The following options from remote font families are also available for local font families within variants:
```

- [display](#display)
- [unicodeRange](#unicoderange)
- [stretch](#stretch)
- [featureSettings](#featuresettings)
- [variationSettings](#variationsettings)

> 

Author: code example

## Available remote font providers

Astro re-exports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers:

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"
```

The following are providers are built in and available to use. However, any unifont provider can be used to make a [custom Astro font provider](#custom-font-providers).

### adobe

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.adobe({
    id: process.env.ADOBE_ID
})
```

### bunny

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.bunny()
```

### fontshare

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.fontshare()
```

### fontsource

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.fontsource()
```

### google

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
provider: fontProviders.google()
```

> ## Custom font providers

Author: Update to your "Build your own font provider" or something

> You can build a custom font provider...

Author: Why would you need one?

- custom stuff
- 3rd party unifont provider

An Astro font provider is made of 2 parts: the config object and the actual implementation.

### Config object

> You can use the `defineFontProvider()` type helper:
> 
> ```ts title="provider/config.ts"
> import { defineFontProvider } from 'astro/config'
> 
> interface Config {
>     // ...
> }
> 
> export function myProvider(config: Config) {
>     return defineFontProvider({
>         name: 'my-provider',
>         entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
>         config
>     })
> }
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the `defineAstroFontProvider()` type helper:

```ts title="provider/config.ts"
import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config'

interface Config {
    // ...
}

export function myProvider(config: Config) {
    return defineAstroFontProvider({
        name: 'my-provider',
        entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
        config
    })
}
```
```

---
title: Experimental fonts API
sidebar:
  label: Fonts
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 6
---

import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

<p>

**Type:** `FontFamily[]`<br />
<Since v="5.7.0" />
</p>

> This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various font providers (eg. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified, fully customizable and type-safe API.

Reviewer 4: comma nit
```suggestion
This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various font providers (eg. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified, fully customizable, and type-safe API.
```

Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. This API helps you keep your site performant with automatic [web font optimizations](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) including preload links, optimized fallbacks, and opinionated defaults to avoid common problems such as downloading unnecessary font files.

To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object with at least one font:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"

> import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>     experimental: {
>         fonts: [{
>             provider: fontProviders.google(),
>             name: "Roboto",
>             cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
>         }]
>     }
> })

Reviewer 4: formatting nit
```suggestion
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
        }]
    }
});
```

```

Then, add the `<Font />` component and site-wide styling in your `<head>`:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---

> import { Font } from 'astro:assets'

Reviewer 4: formatting nit
```suggestion
import { Font } from 'astro:assets';
```

---

<Font cssVariable='--font-roboto' preload />

<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

## Usage

<Steps>

1. `experimental.fonts` accepts an array of font objects. For each font, you must specify a `provider`, the family `name`, and define a `cssVariable` to refer to your font.

    - [`provider`](#provider): You can choose from the list of [built-in remote providers](#available-remote-font-providers), build your own [custom font provider](#build-your-own-font-provider), or use the [local provider](#local-font-variants) to register local font files.
    - [`name`](#name): Choose a font family supported by your provider.
    - [`cssVariable`](#cssvariable-1): Must be a valid [ident](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident) in the form of a CSS variable.

    The following example configures the ["Roboto" family from Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Roboto):

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-10} ins="fontProviders"

>     import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
>     export default defineConfig({
>       experimental: {
>         fonts: [{
>           provider: fontProviders.google(),
>           name: "Roboto",
>           cssVariable: "--font-roboto", 
>         }]
>       }
>     })

Reviewer 4: formatting nit
```suggestion
    import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config";

    export default defineConfig({
      experimental: {
        fonts: [{
          provider: fontProviders.google(),
          name: "Roboto",
          cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
        }]
      }
    });
```

    ```

    More configuration options, such as defining [fallback font families](#fallbacks) and which [`weights`](#weights) and [`styles`](#styles) to download, are available and some will depend on your chosen provider.
    
    See the full [configuration reference](#font-configuration-reference) to learn more.

2. Apply styles using the `<Font />` component. It must be imported and added to your page `<head>`. Providing the font's [`cssVariable`](#cssvariable) is required, and you can optionally [output preload links](#preload):

    ```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" ins={2, 5}
    ---

>     import { Font } from 'astro:assets'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    import { Font } from 'astro:assets';
```

    ---

    <Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" preload />
    ```

    This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout.

    <ReadMore>See the full [`<Font>` component reference](#font--component-reference) for more information.</ReadMore>

    Since the `<Font />` component generates CSS with font declarations, you can reference the font family using the `cssVariable`:

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem label="CSS">

    ```css ins={3}
    <style>
    body {
        font-family: var(--font-roboto);
    }
    </style>
    ```

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 4.0">

    ```css title="src/styles/global.css" ins={4}
    @import 'tailwindcss';

    @theme {
        --font-sans: var(--font-roboto);
    }
    ```

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem label="Tailwind CSS 3.0">

    ```js title="tailwind.config.mjs" ins={6-8}
    /** @type {import("tailwindcss").Config} */
    export default {
    content: ["./src/**/*.{astro,html,js,jsx,md,mdx,svelte,ts,tsx,vue}"],
    theme: {
        extend: {},
        fontFamily: {
            sans: ["var(--font-roboto)"]
        }
    },

>     plugins: [],

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    plugins: []
```

    };
    ```

    </TabItem>

    </Tabs>

</Steps>

## Available remote font providers

Astro re-exports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers. The following have built-in support:

- [Adobe](https://fonts.adobe.com/)
- [Bunny](https://fonts.bunny.net/)
- [Fontshare](https://www.fontshare.com/)
- [Fontsource](https://fontsource.org/)
- [Google](https://fonts.google.com/)

To use a built-in remote provider, configure `provider` with the appropriate value for your chosen font provider:

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Adobe">

```js

> provider: fontProviders.adobe({id: process.env.ADOBE_ID})

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
provider: fontProviders.adobe({ id: process.env.ADOBE_ID })
```

```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Bunny">

```js
provider: fontProviders.bunny()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontshare">

```js
provider: fontProviders.fontshare()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontsource">

```js
provider: fontProviders.fontsource()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Google">

```js
provider: fontProviders.google()
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

You can also [make a custom Astro font provider](#build-your-own-font-provider) for any unifont provider.

## `<Font />` component reference

This component outputs style tags and can optionally output preload links for a given font family.

> It must be imported and added to your page `<head>`. This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout for global use, but may be added to individual pages as needed.

Reviewer 4: comma nit
```suggestion
It must be imported and added to your page `<head>`. This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout for global use but may be added to individual pages as needed.
```

With this component, you have control over which font family is used on which page, and which fonts are preloaded.

### cssVariable

<p>

**Example type:** `"--font-roboto" | "--font-comic-sans" | ...`
</p>

The [`cssVariable`](#cssvariable-1) registered in your Astro configuration:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" "cssVariable"
---

> import { Font } from 'astro:assets'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import { Font } from 'astro:assets';
```

---

<Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" />
```

### preload

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `false`
</p>

Whether to output [preload links](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts#preload) or not:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" "preload"
---

> import { Font } from 'astro:assets'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import { Font } from 'astro:assets';
```

---

<Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" preload />
```

## Font configuration reference

All properties of your fonts must be configured in the Astro config. Some properties are common to both remote and local fonts, and other properties are available depending on your chosen font provider.

### Common properties

The following properties are available for remote and local fonts. `provider`, `name`, and `cssVariable` are required.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"

> import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>   experimental: {
>     fonts: [{
>       provider: fontProviders.google(),
>       name: "Roboto",
>       cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
>     }]
>   }
> })

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    fonts: [{
      provider: fontProviders.google(),
      name: "Roboto",
      cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
    }]
  }
});
```

```

#### provider

<p>

**Type:** `AstroFontProvider | "local"`
</p>

The source of your font files. You can use a [built-in provider](#available-remote-font-providers), write your own [custom provider](#build-your-own-font-provider), or set to `"local"` to use local font files:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" {6}

> import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>   experimental: {
>     fonts: [{
>       provider: fontProviders.google(),
>       name: "Roboto",
>       cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
>     }]
>   }
> })

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    fonts: [{
      provider: fontProviders.google(),
      name: "Roboto",
      cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
    }]
  }
});
```

```

#### name

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

The font family name, as identified by your font provider:

```js
name: "Roboto"
```

#### cssVariable

<p>

**Type:** `string`
</p>

A valid [ident](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident) of your choosing in the form of a CSS variable (i.e. starting with `--`):

```js
cssVariable: "--font-roboto"
```

#### fallbacks

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["sans-serif"]`
</p>

An array of fonts to use when your chosen font is unavailable, or loading. Fallback fonts will be chosen in the order listed. The first available font will be used:

```js
fallbacks: ["CustomFont", "serif"]
```

To disable fallback fonts completely, configure an empty array:

```js
fallbacks: []
```

If the last font in the `fallbacks` array is a [generic family name](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#generic-name), an [optimized fallback](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/font-fallbacks) using font metrics will be generated. To disable this optimization, set `optimizedFallbacks` to false.

#### optimizedFallbacks

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `true`
</p>

> Whether or not to enable optimized fallback generation. You may disable this default optimization to have full control over [`fallbacks`](#fallbacks):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whether or not to enable Astro's optimization features when generating fallback fonts. You may disable this default optimization to have full control over [`fallbacks`](#fallbacks):
```

```js
optimizedFallbacks: false
```

### Remote font properties

Further configuration options are available for remote fonts. Set these to customize the data loaded from your [font provider](#available-remote-font-providers), for example to only download certain font weights or styles.

> Under the hood, these options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/). Some properties may not be supported by some providers, and may be handled differently by each provider.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Under the hood, these options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/). Some properties may not be supported by some providers and may be handled differently by each provider.
```

#### weights

<p>

**Type:** `(number | string)[]`<br />
**Default:** `[400]`
</p>

> An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight). If no value is specified in your configuration, only weight `400` is included by default to prevent unnecessary downloads. Include this array to download additional font weights:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight). If no value is specified in your configuration, only weight `400` is included by default to prevent unnecessary downloads. You will need to include this property to access any other font weights:
```
I realized that saying "this array" can sound like COPY THIS EXACT ARRAY

```js

> weights: [200, "300", "bold"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
weights: [200, "400", "bold"]
```
I don't want it to look like they "get 400 automatically, even if they don't list it" because it happens to be the default!

```

If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify a range of weights:

```js
weights: ["100 900"]
```

#### styles

<p>

**Type:** `("normal" | "italic" | "oblique")[]`<br />
**Default:** `["normal", "italic"]`
</p>

An array of [font styles](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-style):

```js
styles: ["normal", "oblique"]
```

#### subsets

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["cyrillic-ext", "cyrillic", "greek-ext", "greek", "vietnamese", "latin-ext", "latin"]`
</p>

> An array of [font subsets](https://knaap.dev/posts/font-subsetting/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Defines a list of [font subsets](https://knaap.dev/posts/font-subsetting/) to preload.
```

- [display](#display)
- [unicodeRange](#unicoderange)
- [stretch](#stretch)
- [featureSettings](#featuresettings)
- [variationSettings](#variationsettings)

```js title="astro.config.mjs" {14}
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: "local",
            name: "Custom",
            cssVariable: "--font-custom",
            variants: [
                {
                    weight: 400,
                    style: "normal",
                    src: ["./src/assets/fonts/custom-400.woff2"],
                    display: "block",
                },
            ]
        }]
    }
})
```

## Build your own font provider

If you do not wish to use one of the [built-in providers](#available-remote-font-providers) (eg. you want to use a 3rd-party unifont provider or build something for a private registry), you can build your own.

An Astro font provider is made up of two parts: the config object and the actual implementation.

<Steps>

1. Using the `defineAstroFontProvider()` type helper, create a function that returns a font provider config object containing:

>     - `entrypoint`: A URL, a path relative to the root or a package import.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - `entrypoint`: A URL, a path relative to the root, or a package import.
```

    - `config`: An optional serializable object passed to the unifont provider.

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem label="Without config">

    ```ts title="provider/config.ts"
    import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config'

    export function myProvider() {
        return defineAstroFontProvider({
            entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
        })
    }
    ```

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem label="With config">

    ```ts title="provider/config.ts"

>     import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config'
> 
>     interface Config {
>         // ...
>     }
> 
>     export function myProvider(config: Config) {
>         return defineAstroFontProvider({
>             entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
>             config
>         })
>     }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config';

    interface Config {
        // ...
    };

    export function myProvider(config: Config) {
        return defineAstroFontProvider({
            entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
            config
        });
    };
```

    ```

    </TabItem>

    </Tabs>

2. Create a second file to export your unifont `provider` implementation:

    ```ts title="implementation.ts"

>     import { defineFontProvider } from "unifont"
> 
>     export const provider = defineFontProvider("my-provider", async (options, ctx) => {
>         // fetch/define your custom fonts
>         // ...
>     })

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    import { defineFontProvider } from "unifont";

    export const provider = defineFontProvider("my-provider", async (options, ctx) => {
        // fetch/define your custom fonts
        // ...
    });
```

    ```

    :::tip

    You can check out [the source code for unifont's providers](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/blob/main/src/providers/) to learn more about how to create a unifont provider.

    :::

3. Add your custom provider to your font configuration.

>     ```js title="astro.config.mjs"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins="myProvider()`
```

>     ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins="myProvider()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins="myProvider()"
```

    fonts: [{
      provider: fontProviders.myProvider(),
      name: "Custom Font"

>       cssVariable: "--font-custom",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      cssVariable: "--font-custom"
```

---
title: Experimental fonts API
sidebar:
  label: Fonts
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 6
---

import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

<p>

**Type:** `FontFamily[]`<br />
<Since v="5.7.0" />
</p>

This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various font providers (eg. Google, Fontsource, Bunny) through a unified, fully customizable and type-safe API.

> Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. This API helps you keep your site performant with automatic [web font optimizations](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) including preload links, optimized fallbacks, and opiniated defaults to avoid common problems such as downloading unnecessary font files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. This API helps you keep your site performant with automatic [web font optimizations](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) including preload links, optimized fallbacks, and opinionated defaults to avoid common problems such as downloading unnecessary font files.
```
a last minute typo fix from before that didn't get pushed!

To use a built-in remote provider, configure `provider` with the appropriate value for your chosen font provider:

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Adobe">

```js
provider: fontProviders.adobe({id: process.env.ADOBE_ID})
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Bunny">

```js
provider: fontProviders.bunny()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontshare">

```js
provider: fontProviders.fontshare()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontsource">

```js
provider: fontProviders.fontsource()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Google">

```js
provider: fontProviders.google()
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

You can also [make a custom Astro font provider](#build-your-own-font-provider) for any unifont provider.

## `<Font />` component reference

This component outputs style tags and can optionally output preload links for a given font family.

It must be imported and added to your page `<head>`. This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout for global use, but may be added to individual pages as needed.

With this component, you have control over which font family is used on which page, and which fonts are preloaded.

### cssVariable

<p>

> **Type:** `string`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example type:** `"--font-roboto" | "--font-open-sans" | ...`
```
I didn't know whether using comic sans as an example was too controversial 😅 I just wanted something with two words. Could also choose `--font-times-new-roman`

Author: Honestly comic sans would be pretty funny

Reviewer 2: It's your feature, I leave it to you to make the final call! 😂

```js
fallbacks: []
```

If the last font in the `fallbacks` array is a [generic family name](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family#generic-name), an [optimized fallback](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/font-fallbacks) using font metrics will be generated. To disable this optimization, set `optimizedFallbacks` to false.

#### optimizedFallbacks

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `true`
</p>

Whether or not to enable optimized fallback generation. You may disable this default optimization to have full control over [`fallbacks`](#fallbacks):

```js
optimizedFallbacks: false
```

### Remote font properties

Further configuration options are available for remote fonts. Set these to customize the data loaded from your [font provider](#available-remote-font-providers), for example to only download certain font weights or styles.

Under the hood, these options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/). Some properties may not be supported by some providers, and may be handled differently by each provider.

#### weights

<p>

**Type:** `(number | string)[]`<br />
**Default:** `[400]`
</p>

> An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight). If no value is specified in your configuraiton, only weight `400` is included by default to prevent unnecessary downloads. Include this array to download additional font weights:

Reviewer 5: Except this last typo, I didn't catch anything else. Looks good!
```suggestion
An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight). If no value is specified in your configuration, only weight `400` is included by default to prevent unnecessary downloads. Include this array to download additional font weights:
```

```js
display: "block"
```

#### unicodeRange

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font:

```js
unicodeRange: ["U+26"]
```

#### stretch

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

A [font stretch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-stretch):

```js
stretch: "condensed"
```

#### featureSettings

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

Controls the [typographic font features](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-feature-settings) (e.g. ligatures, small caps, or swashes):

```js
featureSettings: "'smcp' 2"
```

#### variationSettings

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

Font [variation settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-variation-settings):

```js
variationSettings: "'xhgt' 0.7"
```

### Local font `variants`

<p>

> HOWEVER YOU TYPE AN ARRAY OF OBJECTS
> 
> **Type:** `[]`<br />

Author: ```suggestion
**Type:** `LocalFontFamily["variants"]`
```

I don't have anything better I'm afraid!

Reviewer 2: Fine by me, but we can leave this comment unresolved until @ArmandPhilippot sees it!

Reviewer 5: I was actually trying to catch up... 😄 So, I agree, it seems better than an empty array!

<Steps>

1. Using the `defineAstroFontProvider()` type helper, create a function that returns a font provider config object containing:

    - `entrypoint`: A URL, a path relative to the root or a package import.
    - `config`: An optional serializable object passed to the unifont provider.

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem label="Without config">

    ```ts title="provider/config.ts"
    import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config'

    export function myProvider() {
        return defineAstroFontProvider({
            entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
        })
    }
    ```

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem label="With config">

    ```ts title="provider/config.ts"
    import { defineAstroFontProvider } from 'astro/config'

    interface Config {
        // ...
    }

    export function myProvider(config: Config) {
        return defineAstroFontProvider({
            entrypoint: new URL('./implementation.js', import.meta.url),
            config
        })
    }
    ```

    </TabItem>

    </Tabs>

2. Create a second file to export your unifont `provider` implementation:

>     ```ts title="myProvider.ts"

Author: ``````suggestion
    ```ts title="implementation.ts"
``````
To be consistent with the entrypoint example above

Reviewer 2: Thank you, I was trying to find out what the proper filename would be from the example and just guessed it was this!

    import { defineFontProvider } from "unifont"

    export const provider = defineFontProvider("my-provider", async (options, ctx) => {
        // fetch/define your custom fonts
        // ...
    })
    ```

    :::tip

    You can check out [the source code for unifont's providers](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/blob/main/src/providers/) to learn more about how to create a unifont provider.

    :::

3. Add your custom provider to your font configuration.

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs"
    fonts: [{
      provider: fontProviders.myProvider(),
      name: "Custom Font"
      cssVariable: "--font-custom",
     }]
    ```

</Steps>

## Caching

The Fonts API caching implementation was designed to be practical in development and efficient in production. During builds, font files are copied to the `_astro/fonts` output directory, so they can benefit from HTTP caching of static assets (usually a year).

> To clear the cache in development, remove the `.astro/fonts` directory. To clear the build cache, remove the `node_modules/.astro/font` directory

Author: ```suggestion
To clear the cache in development, remove the `.astro/fonts` directory. To clear the build cache, remove the `node_modules/.astro/fonts` directory
```

---
title: Experimental fonts API
sidebar:
  label: Fonts
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 6
---

import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

<p>

**Type:** `FontFamily[]`<br />
<Since v="5.7.0" />
</p>

This experimental feature allows you to use fonts from your filesystem and various providers (eg. Google, Fontsource, Bunny...) through a unified, fully customizable and type-safe API.

> Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. We're doing automatic [optimization](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) by creating preload links and optimized fallbacks. We also have opiniated defaults to avoid downloading too many font files.

Reviewer 5: typo:
```suggestion
Web fonts can impact page performance at both load time and rendering time. We're doing automatic [optimization](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts) by creating preload links and optimized fallbacks. We also have opinionated defaults to avoid downloading too many font files.
```

Reviewer 2: I reworded this in my editing pass, but thank you -- caught the typo!

To enable this feature, configure an `experimental.fonts` object:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
        }]
    }
})
```

Then, add a `<Font />` component and site-wide styling in your `<head>`:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font cssVariable='--font-roboto' preload />

<style>
body {
    font-family: var(--font-roboto);
}
</style>
```

## Usage

<Steps>

1. `experimental.fonts` accepts an array of font objects. For each font, you must specify a `provider`, the family `name`, and define a `cssVariable` to refer to your font.

>     - `provider`: You can choose from the list of [built-in remote providers](#available-remote-font-providers), build your own [custom font provider](#custom-font-providers), or use the [local provider](#local-font-properties) to register local font files.

Reviewer 5: fix link:
```suggestion
    - `provider`: You can choose from the list of [built-in remote providers](#available-remote-font-providers), build your own [custom font provider](#build-your-own-font-provider), or use the [local provider](#local-font-properties) to register local font files.
```

    - `name`: Choose a font family supported by your provider.
    - `cssVariable`: Must be a valid [ident](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ident) in the form of a CSS variable.

    The following example configures the ["Roboto" family from Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Roboto):

>     ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-8} ins="fontProviders"
>     import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"
> 
>     export default defineConfig({
>         experimental: {
>             fonts: [{
>                 provider: fontProviders.google(),
>             }]
>         }
>     })
>     ```

Reviewer 5: Based on T&D, wasn't the idea to show a complete configuration here?
```suggestion
    ```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={4-10} ins="fontProviders"
    import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

    export default defineConfig({
        experimental: {
            fonts: [{
                provider: fontProviders.google(),
                name: "Roboto",
                cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
            }]
        }
    })
    ```
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, I believe this is now added!

    More configuration options, such as defining fallback font families, are available and some will depend on your provider. See the full [configuration reference](#font-configuration-reference) to learn more.

2. Apply styles using the `<Font />` component. It must be imported and added to your page `<head>` and `cssVariable` is required.

    ```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" ins={2, 5}
    ---
    import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
    ---

    <Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" preload />
    ```

    This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout.

    <ReadMore>See the full [`<Font>` component reference](#font--component-reference) for more information.</ReadMore>

    Since the `<Font />` component generates CSS with font declarations, you can reference the font family using the `cssVariable`:

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem label="CSS">

>     ```css

Reviewer 5: nit: since the other tabs highlights the CSS var, maybe we should do the same thing here for vanilla CSS:
````suggestion
    ```css ins={3}
````

Reviewer 2: I agree!

    theme: {
        extend: {},
        fontFamily: {
            sans: ["var(--font-roboto)"]
        }
    },
    plugins: [],
    };
    ```

    </TabItem>

    </Tabs>

</Steps>

## Available remote font providers

Astro re-exports most [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/) providers:

- [Adobe](https://fonts.adobe.com/)
- [Bunny](https://fonts.bunny.net/)
- [Fontshare](https://www.fontshare.com/)
- [Fontsource](https://fontsource.org/)
- [Google](https://fonts.google.com/)

They can be used like so:

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Adobe">

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"

fontProviders.adobe({
    id: process.env.ADOBE_ID
})
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Bunny">

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"

fontProviders.bunny()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontshare">

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"

fontProviders.fontshare()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Fontsource">

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"

fontProviders.fontsource()
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Google">

```js
import { fontProviders } from "astro/config"

fontProviders.google()
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

> Any unifont provider can be used to make a [custom Astro font provider](#custom-font-providers).

Reviewer 2: fixed!

## `<Font />` component reference

This component outputs style tags and preload links for a given font family.

It must be imported and added to your page `<head>`. This is commonly done in a component such as `Head.astro` that is used in a common site layout.

With this component, you have control over what font family is used on which page, and which one is preloaded.

### cssVariable

<p>

> **Type:** `string`

Reviewer 5: We don't use that often, but I'm wondering if it might be a good idea to use an `Example type:` like we have for [the `collection` property for the Content Layer API](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/modules/astro-content/#collection). This could be a hint related to the "strong-typed" sentence we had before.
So something like:
```
Example type: `"--font-roboto" | "--font-custom" | ...`
```

Reviewer 2: Looks great! Could one of the examples maybe show what you would do for e.g. comic sans (two words?) What would people tend to do? `--font-comic-sans` , `--font-comicsans`, `--font-comicSans`, `--font-comic🤡sans`???

(Emoji are valid according to the ident link!!)

Author: That's a good idea! I think it's better to show standard kebab case. I let one of you handle it

Reviewer 2: Suggestion made!

</p>

The [`cssVariable`](#cssvariable) registered in your Astro configuration:

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" "cssVariable"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" />
```

### preload

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `false`
</p>

> Wether it should output [preload links](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts#preload) or not:

Reviewer 5: typo:
```suggestion
Whether it should output [preload links](https://web.dev/learn/performance/optimize-web-fonts#preload) or not:
```

Reviewer 2: fixed!

```astro title="src/components/Head.astro" "preload"
---
import { Font } from 'astro:assets'
---

<Font cssVariable="--font-roboto" preload />
```

---

You can then [use the CSS variable](#cssvariable).

## Font configuration reference

All properties of your fonts must be configured in the Astro config. Some properties are common to both remote and local fonts, and other properties are available depending on your chosen font provider.

### Common properties

The following properties are available for remote and local fonts. `provider`, `name`, and `cssVariable` are required.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, fontProviders } from "astro/config"

export default defineConfig({
    experimental: {
        fonts: [{
            provider: fontProviders.google(),
            name: "Roboto",
            cssVariable: "--font-roboto",
            fallbacks: ["sans-serif"], // default
            optimizedFallbacks: true, // default
        }]
    }
})
```

#### provider

<p>

**Type:** `AstroFontProvider | "local"`
</p>

> The source of your font files. You can use a [built-in provider](#available-remote-font-providers), write your own [custom provider](#custom-font-providers), or set to `"local"` to use local font files:

Reviewer 5: fix link:
```suggestion
The source of your font files. You can use a [built-in provider](#available-remote-font-providers), write your own [custom provider](#build-your-own-font-provider), or set to `"local"` to use local font files:
```

Reviewer 2: fixed!

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `true`
</p>

Whether or not to enable optimized fallback generation. Enabling this should only be needed if you want full control over the [`fallbacks`](#fallbacks):

```js
optimizedFallbacks: false
```

### Remote font properties

Further configuration options are available for remote fonts. Set these to customize the data loaded from your [font provider](#available-remote-font-providers), for example to only download certain font weights or styles.

Under the hood, these options are handled by [unifont](https://github.com/unjs/unifont/). Some properties may not be supported by some providers, and may be handled differently by each provider.

#### weights

<p>

**Type:** `(number | string)[]`<br />
**Default:** `[400]`
</p>

An array of [font weights](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight). By defaults, defaults to weight `400` for performance reasons:

```js
weights: [200, "300", "bold"]
```

If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify a range of weights:

```js
weights: ["100 900"]
```

#### styles

<p>

> **Type:** `string[]`<br />

Reviewer 5: I don't think we often use the `Array` type utility but shouldn't we be explicit regarding the valid values?
```suggestion
**Type:** `Array<'normal' | 'italic' | 'oblique'>`<br />
```

Reviewer 2: Big, if true! 👍

**Default:** `["normal", "italic"]`
</p>

An array of [font styles](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-style):

```js
styles: ["normal", "oblique"]
```

#### subsets

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `["cyrillic-ext", "cyrillic", "greek-ext", "greek", "vietnamese", "latin-ext", "latin"]`
</p>

> An array of [font subsets](https://fonts.google.com/knowledge/glossary/subsetting):

Reviewer 5: Not sure if this is better but this is maybe a bit more descriptive:
```suggestion
Defines a list of [font subset names](https://fonts.google.com/knowledge/glossary/subsetting) you would like to be preloaded:
```

Reviewer 2: Can tighten it up...

~~you would like~~ to be preloaded

Author: I'm not going to accept the suggestion because mine above about having a better link would be marked as outdated

Reviewer 2: commited directly

```js
subsets: ["latin"]
```

#### display

<p>

> **Type:** `string`<br />

Reviewer 5: While suggesting a description, I checked the type and I wonder shouldn't we use the exact type here:
```suggestion
**Type:** `"auto" | "block" | "swap" | "fallback" | "optional"`<br />
```

Reviewer 2: If these are the only options, I agree!

**Default:** `"swap"`
</p>

> A [font display](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-display):

Reviewer 5: If we want to be more descriptive maybe something like:
```suggestion
Defines [how a font displays](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-display) based on when it is downloaded and ready for use.
```
If we don't update the type, perhaps we should be more explicit (ie. must be a valid CSS value).

Reviewer 2: Great description!

```js
display: "block"
```

#### unicodeRange

<p>

**Type:** `string[]`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

> A [unicode range](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range):

Reviewer 5: Does the following would be correct and more descriptive?
```suggestion
Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font:
```

Reviewer 2: Nice!

```js
unicodeRange: ["U+26"]
```

#### stretch

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

> A [font stretch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-stretch):

Reviewer 5: Not sure how to describe it... never used this property before. But following the link, I see this is a deprecated feature. Should we warn the user about this?

Author: Most people won't reach for it I think. Also it's rare enough that people will have to click on the link and see it's deprecated so I think it's okay?

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with leaving it minimal, but if it's deprecated, should we even support it?

Author: I think we should, many things are deprecated in browsers but still used!

```js
stretch: "condensed"
```

#### featureSettings

<p>

**Type:** `string`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

> Font [feature settings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-feature-settings):

Reviewer 5: Not sure how this works, so I'm only suggesting something a bit more descriptive based on what is described in the link:
```suggestion
Controls the [typographic font features](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-feature-settings) (e.g. ligatures, small caps, or swashes):
```

Reviewer 2: Big, if true! Florian, can you confirm this is legit? If so, sounds good to me!

            provider: "local",
            name: "Custom",
            cssVariable: "--font-custom",
            variants: [
                {
                    weight: 400,
                    style: "normal",
                    src: ["./src/assets/fonts/custom-400.woff2"]
                },
                {
                    weight: 700,
                    style: "normal",
                    src: ["./src/assets/fonts/custom-700.woff2"]
                },
                // ...
            ]
        }]
    }
})
```

#### Variants

Each variant represents a [`@font-face` declaration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/).

Set the `weight`, `style`, and `src` for each local font. Additionally, [other properties shared with remote fonts](#other-shared-properties) are available.

##### weight

<p>

**Type:** `number | string`
</p>

A [font weight](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight):

```js
weight: 200
```

If the associated font is a [variable font](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_fonts/Variable_fonts_guide), you can specify a range of weights:

```js
weight: "100 900"
```

##### style

<p>

> **Type:** `string`

Reviewer 5: Same as before, maybe we should be explicit regarding the expected values:
```suggestion
**Type:** `"normal" | "italic" | "oblique"`
```
